Coordinator lookup join docs (#154524)
elastic/elasticsearch: docs/reference/query-languages/esql/esql-lookup-join.md

Reviewer: ````suggestion
`LOOKUP JOIN` is also supported in [cross-project search (CPS)](/reference/query-languages/esql/esql-cross-serverless-projects.md).

By default, {{esql}} resolves the lookup index on every project in the query and each project joins against its own local index with that name. In this case, the lookup index must exist on every project being queried.

If the lookup index is missing from one or more linked projects, use [coordinator mode](#coordinator-mode).
````

Reviewer: this section doesn't tied into the next section and it probably should - similar to the suggestions I made on the CPS section

```suggestion
Remote lookup joins are supported in [cross-cluster queries](/reference/query-languages/esql/esql-cross-clusters.md).

By default, {{esql}} resolves the lookup index on every cluster in the query and each cluster joins against its own local index with that name. This follows the same pattern as [remote mode Enrich](/reference/query-languages/esql/esql-cross-clusters.md#esql-enrich-remote).

If the lookup index is missing from one or more remote clusters, use [coordinator mode](#coordinator-mode).
```

Use this when the lookup index is missing from one or more remote clusters or linked projects in the query, or when you need `LOOKUP JOIN` after pipeline-breaking commands such as `STATS`, `LIMIT`, or `SORT`.

```esql
FROM *:data | LOOKUP JOIN _coordinator:lookup-index ON field
```

The lookup runs against the local lookup index on the coordinating node rather than against lookup index copies on each remote cluster.
The join runs on the coordinating node and reads the lookup index from the local cluster or origin project only.

Source rows from remote clusters or linked projects are still queried, then joined against that single lookup index.

Note the following constraints specific to coordinator mode:

* On {{stack}} deployments, the remote cluster name `_coordinator` is reserved. If a remote cluster is registered under that name, coordinator mode cannot be used. The query fails with a validation error until the remote cluster is renamed.
* After a coordinator `LOOKUP JOIN`, remote operations are not supported in the same query. Specifically, a `LOOKUP JOIN` (without the `_coordinator:` prefix) and `ENRICH _remote:` cannot appear later in the pipeline.

> ### Cross-{{serverless-short}} project support

Reviewer: can we put this above coordinator mode (i.e. put coordinator mode docs below this section)?

Author: Updated

FROM log-cluster-*:logs-* | LOOKUP JOIN hosts ON source.ip
```

> ### Coordinator mode

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Run `LOOKUP JOIN` on coordinating node of local cluster [coordinator-mode]
```

suggestion for immediately clarity when scanning the page 

keeping `[coordinator-mode]` explicit anchor will maintain links if you want to tweak this further :)

```{applies_to}

> stack: ga 9.6+

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
stack: ga 9.6+
serverless: unavailable
```

maybe just to be super clear?

Author: Actually, this should be available and should work with CPS

> ### Run `LOOKUP JOIN` on coordinating node of local cluster [coordinator-mode]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Run `LOOKUP JOIN` on coordinating node [coordinator-mode]
```

> ### Run `LOOKUP JOIN` on coordinating node of local cluster [coordinator-mode]

Reviewer: reviewing from a CPS POV, I think we need to decide whether we want to use this example for both CCS and CPS. if we do, it should sit above or below both the CCS + CPS sections (probably below). we could also consider merging the "cross-cluster support" and "cross serverless project support" section to make one "CCS and CPS support" section, then make the coordinator mode info a child or sibling of that section.

I've edited the coordinating node stuff with the assumption that it will be shared for CCS + CPS

```

> When running a cross-cluster query, you can use the `_coordinator:` prefix to execute a `LOOKUP JOIN` on the coordinating node of the local cluster:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When running a cross-cluster query, you can use the `_coordinator:` prefix to execute a `LOOKUP JOIN` on the [coordinating node](docs-content://deploy-manage/distributed-architecture/clusters-nodes-shards/node-roles.md#coordinating-only-node-role) of the local cluster:
```

suggestion if you think link to [oordinating-only-node-role](https://www.elastic.co/docs/deploy-manage/distributed-architecture/clusters-nodes-shards/node-roles#coordinating-only-node-role) is helpful

> When running a cross-cluster query, you can use the `_coordinator:` prefix to execute a `LOOKUP JOIN` on the [coordinating node](docs-content://deploy-manage/distributed-architecture/clusters-nodes-shards/node-roles.md#coordinating-only-node-role) of the local cluster:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In cross-cluster or cross-project queries, you can prefix the index name with `_coordinator:` to run the lookup on the local cluster or origin project instead of on each remote cluster or linked project.

Use this when the lookup index is missing from one or more remote clusters or linked projects in the query, or when you need `LOOKUP JOIN` after pipeline-breaking commands such as `STATS`, `LIMIT`, or `SORT`.
```

```esql
FROM *:data | LOOKUP JOIN _coordinator:lookup-index ON field
```

The lookup runs against the local lookup index on the coordinating node rather than against lookup index copies on each remote cluster.

> This makes `LOOKUP JOIN` usable after pipeline-breaking commands like `STATS`, `LIMIT`, and `SORT` in cross-cluster queries.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The join runs on the coordinating node and reads the lookup index from the local cluster or origin project only.

Source rows from remote clusters or linked projects are still queried, then joined against that single lookup index.
```

Note the following constraints specific to coordinator mode:

> * The remote cluster name `_coordinator` is reserved. If a remote cluster is registered under that name, coordinator mode cannot be used. The query fails with a validation error until the remote cluster is renamed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* On {{stack}} deployments, the remote cluster name `_coordinator` is reserved. If a remote cluster is registered under that name, coordinator mode cannot be used. The query fails with a validation error until the remote cluster is renamed.
```

  * Aliases, datemath, and datastreams are supported, as long as the index pattern matches a single concrete index {applies_to}`stack: ga 9.1.0`.
* The name of the match field in `LOOKUP JOIN lu_idx ON match_field` must match an existing field in the query. This may require `RENAME`s or `EVAL`s to achieve.
* The query will circuit break if there are too many matching documents in the lookup index, or if the documents are too large. More precisely, `LOOKUP JOIN` works in batches of, normally, about 10,000 rows; a large amount of heap space is needed if the matching documents from the lookup index for a batch are multiple megabytes or larger. This is roughly the same as for `ENRICH`.

> * Cross-custer `LOOKUP JOIN` (without the `_coordinator:` prefix) can not be used after aggregations `STATS`, `SORT` and `LIMIT` commands, and coordinator-side `ENRICH` commands. Use the `_coordinator:` prefix to lift this restriction. {applies_to}`stack: ga 9.6+`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Cross-cluster `LOOKUP JOIN` (without the `_coordinator:` prefix) can not be used after aggregations `STATS`, `SORT` and `LIMIT` commands, and coordinator-side `ENRICH` commands. Use the [`_coordinator:` prefix](#coordinator-mode) to lift this restriction. {applies_to}`stack: ga 9.6+`
```

> * Cross-cluster `LOOKUP JOIN` (without the `_coordinator:` prefix) can not be used after aggregations `STATS`, `SORT` and `LIMIT` commands, and coordinator-side `ENRICH` commands. Use the [`_coordinator:` prefix](#coordinator-mode) to lift this restriction. {applies_to}`stack: ga 9.6+`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Cross-cluster or cross-project `LOOKUP JOIN` (without the `_coordinator:` prefix) can not be used after aggregations `STATS`, `SORT` and `LIMIT` commands, and coordinator-side `ENRICH` commands. Use the [`_coordinator:` prefix](#coordinator-mode) to lift this restriction. {applies_to}`stack: ga 9.6+`
```

  * Aliases, datemath, and datastreams are supported, as long as the index pattern matches a single concrete index {applies_to}`stack: ga 9.1.0`.
* The name of the match field in `LOOKUP JOIN lu_idx ON match_field` must match an existing field in the query. This may require `RENAME`s or `EVAL`s to achieve.
* The query will circuit break if there are too many matching documents in the lookup index, or if the documents are too large. More precisely, `LOOKUP JOIN` works in batches of, normally, about 10,000 rows; a large amount of heap space is needed if the matching documents from the lookup index for a batch are multiple megabytes or larger. This is roughly the same as for `ENRICH`.

> * Cross-cluster or cross-project `LOOKUP JOIN` (without the `_coordinator:` prefix) can not be used after aggregations `STATS`, `SORT` and `LIMIT` commands, and coordinator-side `ENRICH` commands. Use the [`_coordinator:` prefix](#coordinator-mode) to lift this restriction. {applies_to}`stack: ga 9.6+`

Reviewer: I'd skip the parentheses as we explain the workaround in the next sentence

I'd also kill the applies tag here - the target of the link can handle the compatibility info

```suggestion
* Cross-cluster or cross-project `LOOKUP JOIN` cannot be used after aggregations `STATS`, `SORT` and `LIMIT` commands, and coordinator-side `ENRICH` commands. Use the [`_coordinator:` prefix](#coordinator-mode) to lift this restriction.
```
